COLLABORATION IN BUSINESS: 

With collaboration systems there are many different types of software that make doing business easier by doing collaboration. These systems can help businesses with communication, sharing documents, working together from long distances, and planning.

Groupware was one of the first software that was used for collaborating for businesses. It was created in 1987 by Rickman and Solvak. Their goal of starting groupware was to place the computer in the middle of managers and technicians which is revolutionizing the way they work.  In 1978 the term groupware was described as the intentional group processes plus software to support them. As you see the use of software is important and improving the ways that collaboration is helping business.  In the early 1990s the first groupware software was delivered to large corporations such as Boeing and IBM. They used these systems for electronic meetings for key eternal process. Lotus Notes was one of products that was created through collaboration. Lotus Notes allow for remote group collaboration right when the internet was fairly new. Lotus Notes which is now known as IBM Notes provides e-mail, calendars, to do lists, contacts, file sharing, instant messaging, discussion forums, and other tools that are used for collaboration.

Web 2.0 is an application that allows people to collaborate and share information online. Web 2.0 is using a host to do functions to help with collaboration. They use the host for document sharing via the cloud, group calendar, instant messaging, and web conferencing. From Web 1.0 to Web 2.0 shifts from a more passive website to making the internet more consumers is the creator. With this shift we now have the creation of wiki pages where users can edit it; anyone can upload a video to YouTube compared to old ways where a network would be the only one who uploads a video.

Groupware can be broken up into three different categories these categories are communication, conferencing, and coordination. The communication can be thought of unstructured form of communication. Some types of communication examples are a simple of phone call, IMs, and emails. Any ways that communications can be exchanged.

The second category is conferencing. Conferencing is when a group works together to obtain a common goal. There are two types of conferencing which are synchronous and asynchronous conferencing. Synchronous conferencing is when people are meeting at a predetermined time. Some examples of synchronous conferencing are your typical face to face meetings, video conferences, or even a simple phone call. Anytime when two people are communicating at the same time is synchronous conferencing. Asynchronous conferencing is when the communication is occurring at different times and not together. An example of asynchronous conferencing is a chain of emails. One person sends an e-mail and the other team members can respond at any time. Another example is a discussion board forum or edits a document on a filing sharing server.

The third category is coordination. The use of coordination is where everyone works interdependent to achieve a common goal. A good example of coordination is the concept of a sports team. Everyone has a certain role and talents on the team and every member on the team comes together to achieve a common goal. Everyone is doing something different but they are coming together achieve a common goal. An example of coordination will be a brainstorming session. You bring together people from different areas than they come in and discuss ideas to finish the product.

There have been several issues in the design and implementation of collaboration systems. The first issue is persistence. Chat and voice communication can allow for issues with evaporating before the session ends. Another issue is authentication. With some communication tools there is no way to verify that the other people in the other end are the ones that are supposed to be on the call or in the meeting. You have no idea that the persons on the other end are listening to the call or that they are other people on the other end that should not be on the call. They might hear sensitive information that might be shared to an unauthorized party. Bandwidth issues are always a key in dealing with technology and collaboration tools. Bandwidth issues have increased with the use of mobile devices and collaboration tools. Bandwidth has improved with the increase of speed and development of new software. The last issue in dealing with groupware and collaboration in general is the motivation of all members in the group. Some members might allow for the work to fall on one or two members and thus making collaboration ineffective because not everyone is participating.

COMMUNICATION IN COLLABORATION

Collaboration systems in an organization are designed to aid people undertaking a common task to achieve their goals. These systems transform the manner in which information is delayed to the various parties in an organization and hence creating harmony in an organization or in a particular task. Collaboration systems are very pivotal in communication. This is because they enhance the communication process in many ways. There are many examples of collaboration systems lead to effective communication. These include email and document management, email and task management, web conferencing and contact management and work flow tools. All these are all beneficial for communication in an organization. 

Collaboration systems save effort for the managers in terms of communication. This is because the integrated system allows for multiple communications and hence a manager is able to manage the multiple relationships on one platform. Consequently, this saves communication effort that would be seen if the manager was using fragmented communication tools.  In addition, collaborative systems also have an effect of saving on communication costs. Collaboration systems allow for seamless data exchange. This is because they eliminate the need to manually exchange information between different people in an organization or project. For example, in a contact management system, there is the need to pull contacts from an email and also a scenario where different people are working on the same document at the same time. Collaboration systems thus allow this to be possible.

Human resource management requires effective communication in order to enhance the efficiency of an organization. Communication can be a challenging task especially if the various employees are in different geographical regions. Further there is need for harmony in that all employees involved in a particular task understand everything about that project. This can only be achieved through effective communication. Collaboration systems enable better management of virtual teams. Through a collaborative system, a manager is able to delegate duties to his/her subordinates and also effectively monitor progress through proper feedback mechanisms provided by a collaboration system. This in turn saves on communication time and creates harmony in an organization.

All in all, communication greatly benefits from collaboration systems. This is because collaborative systems save on communication costs, saves on time and also enable effective management of virtual teams in an organization. They also allow seamless flow of data in an organization. All these have the effect of creating harmony in an organization and help members of an organization to achieve a common goal.
